Abu Bakr al-Siddiq (; 27 October 57323 August 634) was an Arab political and religious leader who founded the Rashidun Caliphate and ruled as its first caliph from 632 until his death in 634. He was the most prominent companion, closest advisor and a father-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Abu Bakr is one of the most important figures in Islamic history.

Abu Bakr was born in 573 CE to Abu Quhafa and Umm Khayr. He belonged to the tribe of Banu Taym. In the Age of Ignorance, he was a monotheist and condemned idol-worshipping. As a wealthy trader, Abu Bakr used to free slaves. He was an early friend of Muhammad and often used to accompany him on trading in Syria. After Muhammad's invitation of Islam, Abu Bakr became one of the first Muslims. He extensively contributed his wealth in support of Muhammad's work and also accompanied Muhammad, on his migration to Medina. By the invitations of Abu Bakr, many prominent Sahabis became Muslims. He remained the closest advisor to Muhammad, being present at almost all his military conflicts. In the absence of Muhammad, Abu Bakr led the prayers and expeditions.

Following Muhammad's death in 632, Abu Bakr succeeded the leadership of the Muslim community as the first Rashidun Caliph, being elected at Saqifah. During his reign, he overcame a number of uprisings, collectively known as the Ridda wars, as a result of which he was able to consolidate and expand the rule of the Islamic state over the entire Arabian Peninsula. He also commanded the initial incursions into the neighboring Sassanian and Byzantine empires, which in the years following his death, would eventually result in the Muslim conquests of Persia and the Levant. Abu Bakr also had an essential role in the compilation of the Quran during his reign. The first finished codex of the Quran was kept with Abu Bakr. All modern versions of the Quran are derived from Abu Bakr's codex.

Abu Bakr's caliphate lasted for only two years, ending with his death after an illness in 634. On his deathbed, he dictated his last testament to Uthman ibn Affan, in which he appointed Umar ibn al-Khattab as his successor. Abu Bakr's ghusl was performed by Ali ibn Abi Talib and the funeral prayer was performed by Umar. Along with Muhammad, Abu Bakr is buried in the Green Dome at the Al-Masjid an-Nabawi in Medina, the second holiest site in Islam.

Though the period of his caliphate was short, it included successful invasions of the two most powerful empires of the time, a remarkable achievement in its own right. He set in motion a historical trajectory that in a few decades would lead to one of the largest empires in history. His victory over the local rebel Arab forces is a significant part of Islamic history. Abu Bakr is widely honored among Muslims.

Name, lineage and titles 

Abu Bakr's full name was Abdullah ibn Abi Quhafa ibn Amir ibn Amr ibn Ka'b ibn Sa'd ibn Taym (). According to the traditions, the Taym clan, which Abu Bakr hailed, were descended from ibn Murrah ibn Ka'b ibn Lu'ayy ibn Ghalib ibn Fihr.

Abu Bakr's birth name is disputed. Most sources record his birth name being Abdullah (). In Arabic, the name Abd Allah means "servant of Allah". However, other sources record Abu Bakr's real name as Abdulkaaba (), meaning "servant of Kaaba". It has been reported that Abdullah was a title used by Abu Quhafa for Abu Bakr.

Abu Bakr spent his early childhood like other Arab children of the time, among the Bedouins who called themselves 'The People of Camel' (Ahl-i-Ba'eer), and developed a particular fondness for camels. In his early years he played with the camel calves and goats, and his love for camels earned him the title (kunya) "Abu Bakr", meaning the father of the young camel.

Preceding his conversion to Islam, Abu Bakr's title was Atiq, meaning "saved one". Muhammad later restated this title when he said that Abu Bakr is the "Atiq". He was called Al-Siddiq (the truthful) by Muhammad after he believed him in the event of Isra and Mi'raj when other people didn't, and Ali confirmed that title several times. Abu Bakr is also referred to in the Quran as the "second of the two in the cave" and "companion" in reference to the event of hijra, where, with Muhammad, he hid in the cave in Jabal Thawr from the Meccan party that was sent after them. Abu Bakr was also sometimes called Ibn Abi Quhafa meaning the 'son of Abu Quhafa'.

Origins and early life

Abu Bakr was born in Mecca in 573, to a wealthy family of the Banu Taym tribe of the Quraysh tribal confederacy. His father Abu Quhafa was a prominent member of the Quraysh. Abu Bakr's mother Umm Khayr also belonged to the Banu Taym.

Like other children of the rich Meccan merchant families, Abu Bakr was literate and never developed a fondness for poetry. He had great knowledge of the genealogy of the Arab tribes, their stories and their politics. Regardless, it recorded that prior to converting to Islam, Abu Bakr practiced as a hanif and never worshipped idols. He also avoided alcohol.

During the Age of Ignorance, Abu Bakr was appointed as a representative of the people of Quraysh for cases of ransom and penalty. Since Abu Bakr was the most knowledgeable of family history of Arabs, he was called 'Scholar of Quraysh'. At the age of thirty eight, Abu Bakr became a chief of the Banu Taym.

Acceptance of Islam 
 The historian Al-Tabari, in his Tarikh al-Tabari, quotes from Muhammad ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas:{{blockquote|I asked my father whether Abu Bakr was the first of the Muslims. He said, 'No, more than fifty people embraced Islam before Abu Bakr; but he was superior to us as a Muslim. And Umar ibn Khattab had embraced Islam after forty-five men and twenty-one women. As for the foremost one in the matter of Islam and faith, it was Ali ibn Abi Talib.}}

Shias and some of the Sunni believe that the second person to publicly accept Muhammad as the messenger of God was Ali ibn Abi Talib, the first being Muhammad's wife Khadija. Ibn Kathir, in his Al Bidaya Wal Nihayah, disregards this. He stated that the first woman to embrace Islam was Khadijah. Zayd ibn Harithah was the first freed slave to embrace Islam. Ali ibn Abi Talib was the first child to embrace Islam, for he has not even reached the age of puberty at that time, while Abu Bakr was the first free man to embrace Islam.

Subsequent life in Mecca

Abu Bakr conversion to Islam initially remained a secret. After he announced his faith, he delivered a speech at the Kaaba. This was the first public address inviting people to offer allegiance to Muhammad was delivered by Abu Bakr. In a fit of fury, the young men of the Quraysh tribe rushed at Abu Bakr and beat him till he lost consciousness. Four members of the Banu Taym wrapped Abu Bakr in a mantle and took him to his house. Umm Khayr saw her son and washed his face. Following this incident, Umm Khayr converted to Islam.

His preaching brought many people to Islam as he persuaded his intimate friends to convert. Many Sahabis, prominently including Uthman, Zubayr, Talha, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, Abu Ubayda, Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, Abu Hudhaifah ibn al-Mughirah and many others converted to Islam by the invitations of Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr's acceptance proved to be a milestone in Muhammad's mission. As slavery was common in Mecca, many slaves accepted Islam. When an ordinary free man accepted Islam, despite opposition, he would enjoy the protection of his tribe. For slaves, however, there was no such protection and they commonly experienced persecution. Abu Bakr felt compassion for slaves, so he purchased eight slaves, four men and four women, and then freed them, paying 40,000 dinar for their freedom.Tarikh ar-Rusul wa al-Muluk 3/ 426 The slaves were Bilal ibn Rabah, Abu Fukayha, Ammar ibn Yasir, Lubaynah, Al-Nahdiah, Harithah bint al-Muammil and Umm Ubays. Most of the slaves liberated by Abu Bakr were either women or old and frail men. Almost all of Abu Bakr's family converted to Islam except his father Abu Quhafa, his son Abdul-Rahman, and his wife Qutaylah.

Last years in Mecca

Abu Bakr's daughter Aisha was betrothed to Muhammad; however, it was decided that the actual marriage ceremony would be held later. In 620 Abu Bakr was the first person to testify to Muhammad's Isra and Mi'raj (Night Journey).

Life in Medina
Migration to Medina

In 622, on the invitation of the Muslims of Medina, Muhammad ordered Muslims to migrate to Medina. The migration began in batches. Ali was the last to remain in Mecca, entrusted with responsibility for settling any loans the Muslims had taken out, and famously slept in the bed of Muhammad when the Quraysh, led by Ikrima, attempted to murder Muhammad as he slept. Meanwhile, Abu Bakr accompanied Muhammad to Medina. Due to the danger posed by the Quraysh, they did not take the road, but moved in the opposite direction, taking refuge in a cave in Jabal Thawr, some five miles south of Mecca. Abdullah ibn Abi Bakr, the son of Abu Bakr, would listen to the plans and discussions of the Quraysh, and at night he would carry the news to the fugitives in the cave. Asma bint Abi Bakr, the daughter of Abu Bakr, brought them meals every day. Aamir, a servant of Abu Bakr, would bring a flock of goats to the mouth of the cave every night, where they were milked. The Quraysh sent search parties in all directions. One party came close to the entrance to the cave, but was unable to see them. Due to this, Quran verse  was revealed. Aisha, Abu Saʽid al-Khudri and Abdullah ibn Abbas in interpreting this verse said that Abu Bakr was the companion who stayed with Muhammad in the cave. Aisha was a wife of Muhammad.

After staying at the cave for three days and three nights, Abu Bakr and Muhammad proceed to Medina, staying for some time at Quba, a suburb of Medina.

Life in Medina

In Medina, Muhammad decided to construct a mosque. A piece of land was chosen and the price of the land was paid for by Abu Bakr. The Muslims, including Abu Bakr, constructed a mosque named Al-Masjid al-Nabawi at the site. Abu Bakr was paired with Khaarij ah bin Zaid Ansari (who was from Medina) as a brother in faith. Abu Bakr's relationship with Khaarijah was most cordial, which was further strengthened when Abu Bakr married Habiba, a daughter of Khaarijah. Khaarijah bin Zaid Ansari lived at Sunh, a suburb of Medina, and Abu Bakr also settled there. After Abu Bakr's family arrived in Medina, he bought another house near Muhammad's.

While the climate of Mecca was dry, the climate of Medina was damp and because of this, most of the migrants fell sick on arrival. Abu Bakr contracted a fever for several days, during which time he was attended to by Khaarijah and his family. In Mecca, Abu Bakr was a wholesale trader in cloth and he started the same business in Medina. He opened his new store at Sunh, and from there cloth was supplied to the market at Medina. Soon his business flourished. Early in 623, Abu Bakr's daughter Aisha, who was already married to Muhammad, was sent on to Muhammad's house after a simple marriage ceremony, further strengthening relations between Abu Bakr and Muhammad.

Military campaigns under Muhammad

Battle of Badr

In Sunni accounts, during one such attack, two discs from Abu Bakr's shield penetrated into Muhammad's cheeks. Abu Bakr went forward with the intention of extracting these discs but Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah requested he leave the matter to him, losing his two incisors during the process. In these stories subsequently Abu Bakr, along with other companions, led Muhammad to a place of safety.

Battle of Uhud

In 625, he participated in the Battle of Uhud, in which the majority of the Muslims were routed and he himself was wounded. Before the battle had begun, his son Abdul-Rahman, at that time still non-Muslim and fighting on the side of the Quraysh, came forward and threw down a challenge for a duel. Abu Bakr accepted the challenge but was stopped by Muhammad. Later, Abdul-Rahman approached his father and said to him "You were exposed to me as a target, but I turned away from you and did not kill you." To this Abu Bakr replied "However, if you had been exposed to me as a target I would not have turned away from you."
In the second phase of the battle, Khalid ibn al-Walid's cavalry attacked the Muslims from behind, changing a Muslim victory to defeat."Uhud", Encyclopedia of Islam Online Many fled from the battlefield, including Abu Bakr. However, according to his own account, he was "the first to return".

Battle of the Trench

In 627 he participated in the Battle of the Trench and also in the Invasion of Banu Qurayza. In the Battle of the Trench, Muhammad divided the ditch into a number of sectors and a contingent was posted to guard each sector. One of these contingents was under the command of Abu Bakr. The enemy made frequent assaults in an attempt to cross the ditch, all of which were repulsed. To commemorate this event a mosque, later known as 'Masjid-i-Siddiq', was constructed at the site where Abu Bakr had repulsed the charges of the enemy.

Battle of Khaybar

Abu Bakr took part in the Battle of Khaybar. Khaybar had eight fortresses, the strongest and most well-guarded of which was called Al-Qamus. Muhammad sent Abu Bakr with a group of warriors to attempt to take it, but they were unable to do so. Muhammad also sent Umar with a group of warriors, but Umar could not conquer Al-Qamus either. Some other Muslims also attempted to capture the fort, but they were unsuccessful as well. Finally, Muhammad sent Ali, who defeated the enemy leader, Marhab.

Military campaigns during final years of Muhammad

In 629 Muhammad sent 'Amr ibn al-'As to Zaat-ul-Sallasal, followed by Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah in response to a call for reinforcements. Abu Bakr and Umar commanded an army under al-Jarrah, and they attacked and defeated the enemy.

In 630, when the Muslims conquered Mecca, Abu Bakr was part of the army. Before the conquest of Mecca his father Abu Quhafa converted to Islam.

Battles of Hunayn and Ta'if

In 630, the Muslim army was ambushed by archers from the local tribes as it passed through the valley of Hunayn, some eleven miles northeast of Mecca. Taken unaware, the advance guard of the Muslim army fled in panic. There was considerable confusion, and the camels, horses and men ran into one another in an attempt to seek cover. Muhammad, however, stood firm. Only nine companions remained around him, including Abu Bakr. Under Muhammad's instruction, his uncle Abbas shouted at the top of his voice, "O Muslims, come to the Prophet of Allah". The call was heard by the Muslim soldiers and they gathered beside Muhammad. When the Muslims had gathered in sufficient number, Muhammad ordered a charge against the enemy. In the hand-to-hand fight that followed the tribes were routed and they fled to Autas.

Abu Bakr was commissioned by Muhammad to lead the attack against Ta'if. The tribes shut themselves in the fort and refused to come out in the open. The Muslims employed catapults, but without tangible result. The Muslims attempted to use a testudo formation, in which a group of soldiers shielded by a cover of cowhide advanced to set fire to the gate. However, the enemy threw red hot scraps of iron on the testudo, rendering it ineffective.

The siege dragged on for two weeks, and still there was no sign of weakness in the fort. Muhammad held a council of war. Abu Bakr advised that the siege might be raised and that God make arrangements for the fall of the fort. The advice was accepted, and in February 630, the siege of Ta'if was raised and the Muslim army returned to Mecca. A few days later Malik bin Auf, the commander, came to Mecca and became a Muslim.

Abu Bakr as Amir-ul-Hajj

In 631 CE, Muhammad sent from Medina a delegation of three hundred Muslims to perform the Hajj according to the new Islamic way and appointed Abu Bakr as the leader of the delegation. The day after Abu Bakr and his party had left for the Hajj, Muhammad received a new revelation: Surah Tawbah, the ninth chapter of the Quran. It is related that when this revelation came, someone suggested to Muhammad that he should send news of it to Abu Bakr. Muhammad said that only a man of his house could proclaim the revelation.

Muhammad summoned Ali, and asked him to proclaim a portion of Surah Tawbah to the people on the day of sacrifice when they assembled at Mina. Ali went forth on Muhammad's slit-eared camel, and overtook Abu Bakr. When Ali joined the party, Abu Bakr wanted to know whether he had come to give orders or to convey them. Ali said that he had not come to replace Abu Bakr as Amir-ul-Hajj, and that his only mission was to convey a special message to the people on behalf of Muhammad.

At Mecca, Abu Bakr presided at the Hajj ceremony, and Ali read the proclamation on behalf of Muhammad. The main points of the proclamation were:

Henceforward the non-Muslims were not to be allowed to visit the Kaaba or perform the pilgrimage.
No one should circumambulate the Kaaba naked.
Polytheism was not to be tolerated. Where the Muslims had any agreement with the polytheists such agreements would be honoured for the stipulated periods. Where there were no agreements a grace period of four months was provided and thereafter no quarter was to be given to the polytheists.

From the day this proclamation was made a new era dawned, and Islam alone was to be supreme in Arabia.

Expedition of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq

Abu Bakr led one military expedition, the Expedition of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, which took place in Najd, in July 628 (third month 7AH in the Islamic calendar). Abu Bakr led a large company in Nejd on the order of Muhammad. Many were killed and taken prisoner. The Sunni Hadith collection Sunan Abu Dawud mentions the event.

Expedition of Usama bin Zayd

In 632, during the final weeks of his life, Muhammad ordered an expedition into Syria to avenge the defeat of the Muslims in the Battle of Mu'tah some years previously. Leading the campaign was Usama ibn Zayd, whose father, Muhammad's erstwhile adopted son Zayd ibn Harithah, had been killed in the earlier conflict. No more than twenty years old, inexperienced and untested, Usama's appointment was controversial, becoming especially problematic when veterans such as Abu Bakr, Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas were placed under his command. Nevertheless, the expedition was dispatched, though soon after setting off, news was received of Muhammad's death, forcing the army to return to Medina. The campaign was not re-engaged until after Abu Bakr's ascension to the caliphate, at which point he chose to reaffirm Usama's command, which ultimately led to its success.

Death of Muhammad

In Muhammad's final days, he was confined to bed by Abu Bakr. As Muhammad was nearing death, he found himself unable to lead prayers as he usually would. He instructed Abu Bakr to take his place, ignoring concerns from Aisha that her father was too emotionally delicate for the role. Abu Bakr subsequently took up the position, and when Muhammad entered the prayer hall during the Fajr prayers, Abu Bakr attempted to step back to let him to take up his normal place and lead. However, Muhammad sat next to Abu Bakr, allowing him to continue. Then Muhammad reportedly ascended the pulpit and addressed the congregation, saying, "God has given his servant the choice between this world and that which is with God and he has chosen the latter." Abu Bakr, understanding this to mean that Muhammad did not have long to live, responded "Nay, we and our children will be your ransom." Muhammad consoled his friend and ordered that all the doors leading to the mosque be closed aside from that which led from Abu Bakr's house, "for I know no one who is a better friend to me than he." Sunnis use this to reinforce the great friendship and trust which existed between him and Abu Bakr.

Upon Muhammad's death, the Muslim community was unprepared for the loss of its leader and many experienced a profound shock. Umar was particularly affected, instead declaring that Muhammad had gone to consult with God and would soon return, threatening anyone who would say that Muhammad was dead. Abu Bakr, having returned to Medina, calmed Umar by showing him Muhammad's body, convincing him of his death. He then addressed those who had gathered at the mosque, saying, "If anyone worships Muhammad, Muhammad is dead. If anyone worships God, God is alive, immortal", thus putting an end to any idolising impulse in the population. He then concluded with a verse from the Quran: "Muhammad is no more than an apostle, and many apostles have passed away before him."

 Caliphate 

Election

In the immediate aftermath of the death of Muhammad, a gathering of the Ansar (natives of Medina) took place in the Saqifah (courtyard) of the Banu Sa'ida clan. The general belief at the time was that the purpose of the meeting was for the Ansar to decide on a new leader of the Muslim community among themselves, with the intentional exclusion of the Muhajirun (migrants from Mecca), though this has later become the subject of debate.

Upon learning of the meeting, Abu Bakr hastened to the gathering. After arriving, Abu Bakr addressed the assembled men with a warning that an attempt to elect a leader outside of Muhammad's own tribe, the Quraysh, would likely result in dissension, as only they can command the necessary respect among the community. The companion Habab ibn Mundhir suggested that the Quraysh and the Ansar choose a leader each from among themselves, who would then rule jointly. The group grew heated upon hearing this proposal and began to argue amongst themselves. As Abu Bakr noticed the bitterness in the meeting, he took Umar and Abu Ubayda, by his hand and offered them to the Ansar as potential choices. The orientalist William Muir gives the following observation of the situation:

Umar took Abu Bakr's hand and swore his own allegiance to the latter, which was followed by the gathered men. The meeting broke up when a violent scuffle erupted between Umar and the chief of the Banu Sa'ida, Sa'd ibn Ubadah. This may indicate that the choice of Abu Bakr may not have been unanimous, with emotions running high as a result of the disagreement.

Abu Bakr was almost universally accepted as head of the Muslim community, under the title of caliph, as a result of Saqifah, though he did face contention because of the rushed nature of the event. Several companions, most prominent among them being Ali ibn Abi Talib, initially refused to acknowledge his authority. Among Shia Muslims, it is also argued that Ali had previously been appointed as Muhammad's heir, with the election being seen as in contravention to the latter's wishes. Abu Bakr later sent Umar to ask allegiance from Fatimah, which resulted in an altercation that may have involved violence. However, after six months the group made peace with Abu Bakr and Ali pledged him his allegiance. After Ali pledged his allegiance, Ali used to help Abu Bakr on government and religious matters.

 Administration 
Abu Bakr was a constitutional ruler. He held the caliphate to be a sacred trust. He declared jihad against traitors. Abu Bakr regarded all men, either rich or low, as equal. The caliphate was neither theocracy nor democracy. Abu Bakr's close associates Umar, Uthman, Ali and Zayd ibn Thabit acted as his secretaries. He also had an advisory council.

 Ridda Wars 

Soon after Abu Bakr's election, several Arab tribes launched revolts, threatening the unity and stability of the new community and state. These insurgencies and the caliphate's responses to them are collectively referred to as the Ridda Wars ("Wars of Apostasy"). The opposition movements came in two forms, one which challenged the political power of the caliphate, with the other being the acclamation of rival religious ideologies, headed by political leaders who claimed prophethood.

Some of the revolts of this type took the form of tax rebellions in Najd among tribes such as the Banu Fazara and Banu Tamim. Other dissenters, while initially allied to the Muslims, used Muhammad's death as an opportunity to attempt to restrict the growth of the new Islamic state. They include some of the Rabīʿa in Bahrayn, the Azd in Oman, as well as among the Kinda and Khawlan in Yemen. Abu Bakr, likely understanding that maintaining firm control over the disparate tribes of Arabia was crucial to ensuring the survival of the state, suppressed the insurrections with military force. He dispatched Khalid ibn Walid and a body of troops to subdue the uprisings in Najd as well as that of Musaylimah, who posed the most serious threat. Concurrent to this, Shurahbil ibn Hasana and Al-Ala'a Al-Hadrami were sent to Bahrayn, while Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl, Hudhayfah al-Bariqi and Arfaja al-Bariqi were instructed to conquer Oman. Finally, Al-Muhajir ibn Abi Umayya and Khalid ibn Asid were sent to Yemen to aid the local governor in re-establishing control. Abu Bakr also made use of diplomatic means in addition to military measures. Like Muhammad before him, he used marriage alliances and financial incentives to bind former enemies to the caliphate. For instance, a member of the Banu Hanifa who had sided with the Muslims was rewarded with the granting of a land estate. Similarly, a Kindah rebel named Al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, after repenting and re-joining Islam, was later given land in Medina as well as the hand of Abu Bakr's sister Umm Farwa in marriage.

At their heart, the Ridda movements were challenges to the political and religious supremacy of the Islamic state. Through his success in suppressing the insurrections, Abu Bakr had in effect continued the political consolidation which had begun under Muhammad's leadership with relatively little interruption. By wars' end, he had established an Islamic hegemony over the entirety of the Arabian Peninsula.

 Battles against Tulayha 

Few days after Abu Bakr's election, in July 632, Tulayha ibn Khuwaylid, from the Banu Asad tribe, was preparing to launch an attack on Medina. Abu Bakr raised an army primarily from the Banu Hashim. He appointed Ali ibn Abi Talib, Talha ibn Ubayd Allah and Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, each as commander of one-third of the newly organized force. Tulayha's forces was defeated and driven to Zhu Hussa. Though, few months after, Tulayha again launched an attack on the Muslim forces. Abu Bakr appointed Khalid ibn al-Walid as the main commander. Khalid had an army of 6,000 men whereas Tulayha had an army of 30,000 men. However, Tulayha's forces were crushed by Khalid ibn al-Walid and his forces. After the battle, Tulayha accepted Islam and asked forgiveness from Abu Bakr. Though, Abu Bakr forgave Tulayha, he refused to allow Tulayha to participate in wars on the Muslim side since Tulayha killed a Sahabi called Akasha ibn Mihsan in the battle.

 Battle of Yamama 
Musaylimah, from the Banu Hanifa tribe, was one of the biggest enemies of Abu Bakr. He is denounced in Islamic history as "false prophet". Musaylimah, along with his wife Sajah from Banu Taghlib and Banu Tamim, claimed prophethood and gathered an army of 40,000 people to attack against Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr appointed Khalid ibn al-Walid as the primary commander and appointed Ikrimah and Shurahbil as the commander of the corps. In the battle, Musaylimah's forces were crushed by Khalid and his forces. However, Musaylimah's forces killed about 360 huffaz (memorizers of the Quran) were killed.Hasan, Sayyid Siddiq; Nadwi, Abul Hasan Ali; Kidwai, A.R. (translator) (2000). The collection of the Qur'an. Karachi: Qur'anic Arabic Foundation. pp. 34–5. Wahshi ibn Harb killed Musaylimah in the battle. After the battle, Musaylimah's wife Sajah became a devout Muslim.

Preservation of the Quran

Abu Bakr was instrumental in preserving the Quran in written form. After the Battle of Yamama in 632, numerous memorizers of the Quran had been killed. Umar fearing that the Quran may become lost or corrupted, Umar requested that Abu Bakr authorise the compilation and preservation of the scriptures in written format. The caliph was initially hesitant, being quoted as saying, "how can we do that which the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless and keep him, did not himself do?" He eventually relented, however, and appointed Zayd ibn Thabit, who had previously served as one of the scribes of Muhammad, for the task of gathering the scattered verses. The fragments were recovered from every quarter, including from the ribs of palm branches, scraps of leather, stone tablets and "from the hearts of men". The collected work was transcribed onto sheets and verified through comparison with Quran memorisers. The finished codex, termed the Mus'haf, was presented to Abu Bakr, who prior to his death, bequeathed it to his successor Umar. Upon Umar's own death, the Mus'haf was left to his daughter Hafsa, who had been one of the wives of Muhammad. It was this volume, borrowed from Hafsa, which formed the basis of Uthman's legendary prototype, which became the definitive text of the Quran. All later editions are derived from this original.

 Expeditions into Persia and Levant 
With Arabia having united under a single centralized state with a formidable military, the region could now be viewed as a potential threat to the neighbouring Byzantine and Sasanian empires. It may be that Abu Bakr, reasoning that it was inevitable that one of these powers would launch a pre-emptive strike against the youthful caliphate, decided that it was better to deliver the first blow himself. Regardless of the caliph's motivations, in 633, small forces were dispatched into Iraq and Palestine, capturing several towns. Though the Byzantines and Sassanians were certain to retaliate, Abu Bakr had reason to be confident; the two empires were militarily exhausted after centuries of war against each other, making it likely that any forces sent to Arabia would be diminished and weakened.

A more pressing advantage though was the effectiveness of the Muslim fighters as well as their zeal, the latter of which was partially based on their certainty of the righteousness of their cause. Additionally, the general belief among the Muslims was that the community must be defended at all costs. Historian Theodor Nöldeke gives the somewhat controversial opinion that this religious fervour was intentionally used to maintain the enthusiasm and momentum of the ummah:

Though Abu Bakr had started these initial conflicts which eventually resulted in the Islamic conquests of Persia and the Levant, he did not live to see those regions conquered by Islam, instead leaving the task to his successors.

Death

On 8 August 634, Abu Bakr fell sick. He developed a high fever and was confined to bed. His illness was prolonged, and when his condition worsened, he felt that his end was near. Realizing this, he sent for Ali and requested him to perform his ghusl since Ali had also done it for Muhammad.On his deathbed, Abu Bakr nominated Umar as his successor. He gave the amount of six thousand dirhams and his personal assets to Umar. Abu Bakr divided his property among his children, in accordance with Sharia.
Abu Bakr dictated his last testament to Uthman ibn Affan as follows:

On 23 August 634 (22 Jumada al-Thani), at the age of 63, Abu Bakr died. His death took place between Maghrib and Isha prayers. Two pieces of sheets were used for Abu Bakr's coffin. Ali performed the ghusl and Umar led the funeral prayer for him. Abu Bakr was buried beside the grave of Muhammad.

During the reign of the Umayyad caliph al-Walid I, Al-Masjid an-Nabawi was expanded to include the site of Abu Bakr's tomb. The Green Dome above the tomb was built by the Mamluk sultan Al Mansur Qalawun in the 13th century, although the green color was added in the 16th century, under the reign of Ottoman Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. Among tombs adjacent to that of Abu Bakr, are of Muhammad, Umar, and an empty one reserved for Isa."Isa", Encyclopedia of Islam

 Wives and children 

Abu Bakr had four wives. His first wife Qutaylah bint Abd al-Uzza bore him a daughter Asma and a son Abdullah. Though Asma and Abdullah became Muslims, their mother Qutaylah didn't become a Muslim and Abu Bakr divorced her. Abu Bakr's second wife was Zaynab bint Amir, who bore him Abdul-Rahman and Aisha. Zaynab and her daughter Asma converted to Islam whereas Abdul-Rahman didn't convert until the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah in 628 CE.As-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa. Translated by Jarrett, H. S. (1881). The History of the Caliphs, p. 35. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. Abu Bakr's third wife was Asma bint Umais, who bore Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr. Before her marriage with Abu Bakr, Asma was a wife of Jafar ibn Abi Talib, and after Abu Bakr's death, Asma married Ali ibn Abi Talib. Abu Bakr's fourth wife was Habibah bint Kharijah. She bore Umm Kulthum, who was born after Abu Bakr's death. Abu Bakr's descendants are called Siddiquis. The Sufi Naqshbandi spiritual order is believed to be originating from Abu Bakr.The Naqshbandiyya: orthodoxy and activism in a worldwide Sufi tradition by Itzchak Weismann, 2007, p24Islamic Sufism by Sirdar Ikbal Ali Shah, Tractus Books, 2000, p104 The Shia Imams Jafar al-Sadiq, Musa al-Kazim, Ali al-Reza, Muhammad al-Jawad, Ali al-Hadi, Hasan al-Askari and Muhammad al-Mahdi are all descended from Abu Bakr.

Appearance
The historian Al-Tabari, in regards to Abu Bakr's appearance, records the following interaction between Aisha and her paternal nephew, Abdullah ibn Abdul-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr:

When she was in her howdah and saw a man from among the Arabs passing by, she said, "I have not seen a man more like Abu Bakr than this one." We said to her, "Describe Abu Bakr." She said, "A slight, white man, thin-bearded and bowed. His waist wrapper would not hold but would fall down around his loins. He had a lean face, sunken eyes, a bulging forehead, and trembling knuckles."

Referencing another source, Al-Tabari further describes him as being "white mixed with yellowness, of good build, slight, bowed, thin, tall like a male palm tree, hook-nosed, lean-faced, sunken-eyed, thin-shanked, and strong-thighed. He used to dye himself with henna and black dye."

Legacy

 Political legacy 

Though the period of his caliphate covers only two years, two months and fifteen days, it included successful invasions of the two most powerful empires of the time: the Sassanid Empire and Byzantine Empire. Abu Bakr's reign lasted for 27 months, during which he crushed the rebellion of the Arab tribes throughout the Arabian Peninsula in the successful Ridda Wars. Abu Bakr's main objective was to extend the caliphate over the entire Arabia and defeat the rebel tribes, in which he succeeded. In the last months of his rule, he sent Khalid ibn al-Walid on conquests against the Sassanid Empire in Mesopotamia and against the Byzantine Empire in Syria. This would set in motion a historical trajectory, continued later on by Umar and Uthman, that in just a few short decades would lead to one of the largest empires in history. He had little time to pay attention to the administration of state, though state affairs remained stable during his Caliphate. On the advice of Umar and Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah, he agreed to draw a salary from the state treasury and discontinue his cloth trade.

Abu Bakr had the distinction of being the first caliph in the history of Islam and also the first caliph to nominate a successor. He was the only caliph in the history of Islam who refunded to the state treasury at the time of his death the entire amount of the allowance that he had drawn during the period of his caliphate. He has the distinction of purchasing the land for Al-Masjid al-Nabawi.

 Religious legacy 

Sunni Muslims view Abu Bakr as the greatest Sahabah. They consider Abu Bakr as one of the ten to whom Paradise was promised () whom Muhammad had testified were destined for Paradise. Abu Bakr is regarded among the best of Muhammad's followers. Muhammad reportedly said: "If the faith of Abu Bakr was weighed against the faith of the people of the earth, the faith of Abu Bakr would outweigh the others." Abu Bakr used to solve disputes by looking at the Quran and Sunnah. He was also the most knowledgeable Sahabi regarding the genealogy of Arabs.

Shia Muslims believe that Ali ibn Abi Talib was supposed to assume the leadership, and that he had been publicly and unambiguously appointed by Muhammad as his successor at Ghadir Khumm. Most Twever Shias (largest Shia branch) have a negative view of Abu Bakr because, after Muhammad's death, Abu Bakr refused to grant Muhammad's daughter, Fatimah, the garden of Fadak which she claimed her father had given to her as a gift before his death. Abu Bakr refused to give Fadak because he told that Muhammad had told him that the prophets of God do not leave as inheritance any worldly possessions. However, as Sayed Ali Asgher Razwy notes in his book A Restatement of the History of Islam & Muslims, Muhammad inherited a maid servant, five camels, and ten sheep. Shia Muslims believe that prophets can receive inheritance, and can pass on inheritance to others as well. In addition, Twelvers accuse Abu Bakr of participating in the alleged attack on Fatimah's house. Some Twelvers also believe Abu Bakr had no role in the preservation of the Quran, claiming that they should have accepted the copy of the book in the possession of Ali. Early sources report that Ali's compiled Quran was lost and he praised Abu Bakr for preserving the Quran.

Zaydi Shias (second-largest Shia branch),Stephen W. Day (2012). Regionalism and Rebellion in Yemen: A Troubled National Union. Cambridge University Press. p. 31. .
Jump up believe Abu Bakr's caliphate to be legitimate. In the last hours of Zayd ibn Ali (the uncle of Jafar al-Sadiq), he was betrayed by the people in Kufa who said to him: "May God have mercy on you! What do you have to say on the matter of Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattab?" Zayd ibn Ali said, "I have not heard anyone in my family renouncing them both nor saying anything but good about them...when they were entrusted with government they behaved justly with the people and acted according to the Quran and the Sunnah".The waning of the Umayyad caliphate by Tabarī, Carole Hillenbrand, 1989, p37, p38

See also

 Bodla
 Laqit bin Malik Al-Azdi, rebel during Abu Bakr's Caliphate
 List of Sahabah
 Sunni view of the Sahaba
 Muadh ibn Jabal
 Sermon of Fadak

Notes

References

Bibliography

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Further reading
Online
 Abū Bakr Muslim caliph, in Encyclopædia Britannica Online'', by The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica, Yamini Chauhan, Aakanksha Gaur, Gloria Lotha, Noah Tesch and Amy Tikkanen

External links

 Muslim:
QuilliamPress.com: Abu Bakr 
 AbuBakr.com 
 Virtues of Hazrat Abu Bakr 
 Detailed Life of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq 
 Abu Bakr's life
 Naqshbandi-Haqqani Sufi Order biography of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq
 Greatness of Abu Bakr
 Biography of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq by Adam Walker 
Urdu Audio
 Virtues of Abu Bakr Urdu Audio
 Abu Bakr appearing in Narrations/Hadith recorded by Imam Bukhari – www.SearchTruth.com
 Abu bakr's appointment as Khalifah
 Searchable Family tree of Abu Bakr as-Siddeeq by Happy Books
 Non-Muslim:
 Abu Bakr
 Unclassified:
 Abu Bakr
 Abu Bakr from Islamonline
 Sirah of Abu Bakr (Radia'Allahuanhu) Part 1 by Shaykh Sayyed Muhammad bin Yahya Al-Husayni Al-Ninowy.
 Shia:
Incident of the cave
Abu Bakr

 
573 births
634 deaths
People from Mecca
Rashidun caliphs
 
7th-century caliphs
Sahabah who participated in the battle of Uhud
Sahabah who participated in the battle of Badr
People of the Muslim conquest of the Levant
Arab slave owners
Sahabah hadith narrators
People of the Ridda wars