In Greek mythology, Aeolus (;  , ) is a name shared by three mythical characters. These three personages are often difficult to tell apart, and even the ancient mythographers appear to have been perplexed about which Aeolus was which. Diodorus Siculus made an attempt to define each of these three (although it is clear that he also became muddled), and his opinion is followed here. 
 The first Aeolus was a son of Hellen and eponymous founder of the Aeolian race.
 The second Aeolus was a son of Poseidon, who led a colony to islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea.
 The third Aeolus was a son of Hippotes who is mentioned in Odyssey and the Aeneid as the Keeper of the Winds.

All three men named Aeolus appear to be connected genealogically, although the precise relationship, especially regarding the second and third Aeolus, is often ambiguous as their identities seem to have been merged by many ancient writers.

Aeolus was also the name of the following minor characters:
 Aeolus, a defender of Thebes in the war of the Seven against Thebes. He was killed by Parthenopaeus.
 Aeolus, a Trojan companion of Aeneas in Italy, where he was killed by Turnus, King of the Rutulians. Aeolus was father of Clytius and Misenus. "Otherwise unknown to fame", he survived both the Greeks and Achilles at Troy, and Richard F. Thomas pointed out textual parallels between this passage and the Illiad, book 20.

Notes

References 
 Apollodorus The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Greek text available from the same website
 Gaius Julius Hyginus Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies Online version at the Topos Text Project
 Homer, The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, Maine, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Greek text available from the same website
 Publius Papinius Statius The Thebaid translated by John Henry Mozley. Loeb Classical Library Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1928. Online version at the Topos Text Project
 Publius Papinius Statius, The Thebaid. Vol I-II John Henry Mozley. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 1928 Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library
 Publius Vergilius Maro Aeneid Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
 Publius Vergilius Maro, Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn & Co. 1900 Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library

Trojans
Characters in the Aeneid
Characters in Greek mythology
Characters in Seven against Thebes